    AEP: 5
    Title: Origin mirrors
    Author: Alejandro R. Mosteo <amosteo@unizar.es>
    Status: Draft
    Created: 2026-06-13

Abstract
========

Implement support for origin mirrors, so when the main origin is down, alr can
use a mirror to fetch a release.

Rationale
=========

As of this document, alr supports a single origin under the `[origin]` object
in an index manifest. The proposal is to keep this object as the authoritative
source, and allow the manifest to contain zero or more mirrors under the
top-level `[[mirror]]` array of tables.

This preserves the existing meaning and shape of `[origin]`, while avoiding
special handling of mirrors inside the origin parser. Mirrors can still reuse
the same origin syntax internally.

For the first implementation, mirrors must be of the same exact kind as the
origin, and contain a bitwise copy. That is, there cannot be hashes or commits,
and if there are, they should match the origin's. This could be relaxed in the
future perhaps, but maximum safety and coherence is the goal for now.

New, special origins (e.g., Software Heritage Foundation) could be added in the
future that would not need to adhere to this rule, as they use their own
storage format.

A new optional field, `name`, will be added that will allow selecting a mirror
or even give a list of priorities. Until this is implemented, the release would
be fetched using the origin first and then mirrors in order of appearance.

Example:

```toml
[origin]
url = "git+https://example.com/upstream/project.git"
commit = "0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567"

[[mirror]]
url = "git+https://mirror.example.com/project.git"

[[mirror]]
url = "git+https://other.example.com/project.git"
```

Implementation steps
--------------------

Progressive implementation through several PRs.

1. Allow index manifests to contain an optional top-level `[[mirror]]` array of
   tables. During this step, load releases with mirrors but discard them. No
   changes to `Releases.Release` yet. Bump index version.

1. Actually store mirrors in `Releases.Release`, alongside the authoritative
   origin. Implement verifications during loading: either no hash/commit in
   mirrors, or matching origin's.

1. Do use mirrors in `[[mirror]]` array order after origin failure.

1. Add `name` field. Make the name `origin` reserved for the authoritative
   `[origin]`, and use it when referring to the primary source in mirror
   preference settings. Add a setting to give a comma-separated list to try
   mirrors in order of preference. Implement the fetching in order.

1. Document in spec and schema.

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.
