    AEP: 3
    Title: Command `alr install` information
    Author: Alejandro R. Mosteo <amosteo@unizar.es>
    Status: Draft
    Created: 2022-01-19

Abstract
========

Information gathered about the operation of `gprinstall`, relevant to our
purposes of how to work with static/dynamic libraries and with different
versions of the same library/compilers.

Information
===========

By using different names during installation, several versions of the same lib
can be made to coexist, with some caveats.

For example, after having installed libhello 1.0.0 (static) and libhello 1.0.1
(dynamic) and hello 1.0.2 (dynamic), we obtain this tree:

```
prefix/
├── bin
│   └── hello
├── include
│   ├── hello=1.0.2
│   │   └── hello
│   │       ├── hello.adb
│   │       └── hello_config.ads
│   ├── libhello=1.0.0
│   │   └── libhello
│   │       ├── libhello.adb
│   │       └── libhello.ads
│   └── libhello=1.0.1
│       └── libhello
│           ├── libhello.adb
│           ├── libhello.ads
│           └── libhello_config.ads
├── lib
│   ├── libhello=1.0.0
│   │   └── libhello
│   │       ├── libhello.a
│   │       └── libhello.ali
│   ├── libhello=1.0.1
│   │   └── libhello
│   │       ├── libhello.ali
│   │       ├── libhello_config.ali
│   │       ├── Libhello.so.1.0.1
│   │       └── libLibhello.so -> ../libhello/Libhello.so.1.0.1
│   ├── Libhello.so.1.0.1 -> ../lib/libhello=1.0.1/libhello/Libhello.so.1.0.1
│   └── libLibhello.so -> ../lib/libhello=1.0.1/libhello/libLibhello.so
└── share
    └── gpr
        ├── hello.gpr
        ├── libhello.gpr
        └── manifests
            ├── hello=1.0.2
            ├── libhello=1.0.0
            └── libhello=1.0.1
```

First caveat is that `gprinstall` clobbers `prefix/share/gpr/libhello.gpr`
without warning, even if `-f` was not used. This means that an installation
with the purpose of development cannot have several versions installed.

Still, it seems we could rely on such a prefix for executables depending on
different versions of the same dynamic library, as ldd shows the proper
dependency:

```
$ ldd prefix/bin/hello
	linux-vdso.so.1 (0x00007fffa772f000)
	Libhello.so.1.0.1 => not found
	libgnat-12.so => /path/to/compiler/.../libgnat-12.so (0x00007fda1ca0e000)
	libgcc_s.so.1 => /path/to/compiler/.../libgcc_s.so.1 (0x00007fda1c7ef000)
	libc.so.6 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x00007fda1c5c5000)
	libdl.so.2 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libdl.so.2 (0x00007fda1c5c0000)
	libm.so.6 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libm.so.6 (0x00007fda1c4d9000)
	/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 (0x00007fda1d0b4000)
```

By using `--mode=usage`, there is no ali, gpr or source files installed. So
going with this mode, unneeded conflicting files are not even installed.

Uninstalling two versions will remove the gpr file after the first uninstall.
However, the second uninstall will not fail, silently removing the rest of
files.

For uninstallation we need to supply the project file, which can come from the
original build folder or from the installed share/gpr location.

However, when installing in usage mode, there will be no gpr file installed,
forcing to preserve the original project file.

In usage mode, static libraries are not installed, and no manifest is created
if nothing gets installed. Uninstalling will then complain about lack of manifest.

It seems that, at least for basic code, an executable build with a compiler and
a dynamic library build with another are compatible.

Executables depend on properly versioned `.so.x.x.x` files, so the extra `.so`
file clobbered by several installs is not important.

Summary of findings
===================

- Several dynamic versions of a library are possible, for executables.
  - Development with several versions is not possible.
- Dependencies on libraries from the compiler also appear.
  - It would then be better to use a compiler from within the prefix.
- Uninstall of several versions requires preserving the original project file.
  - When uninstalling only one version, the installed gpr file suffices.
- Compiler consistency between dynamic libraries is not mandatory.
- Executables link against the properly versioned dynamic library.

Proposal
========

Given these findings, and the primary need of using `alr install` to make binaries
available, and not to make development libraries available, we can abandon this
latter notion for good. Sharing of large dependencies, if ever implemented will use
a different mechanism.

For installing executables, each installation can be performed on its own: we need
not track crates (as we can check the gprinstall manifests) nor consider
incompatibilities, as there are none. Worst case, two releases from the same crate
would be detected by their manifests, and two different crates clobbering each other
would be detected during `gprinstall`.

For uninstallation, we may redeploy sources to have access to the original project
files.

For (un)installation of local crates, there's also no issue: they will use the local
version, and we have the gpr file available too for both.

We could consider caching build directories for faster installs of related crates
sharing several dependencies, and faster uninstallation. This would incur some disk
usage penalty so we may want to make this optional.

We may want to track dependencies to prevent uninstallation of libraries which are
depended upon. This would be a final enhancement. Uninstallation doesn't seem to be
a pressing matter, as prefixes will be fast to recreate.

Tracking of dependencies isn't trivial as we can't use a single root (there will be
"incompatible" (in solution sense) crates installed quite often, if only because of
forced compilers).

Roadmap
=======

Wanted and simple to implement:

- Installation of binary releases
   - Un-uninstallable if there is no project file
- Installation of local releases
- Installation of indexed releases

Optional or low priority:

- Uninstallation relying on project file (local/indexed releases)
- Uninstallation of binary releases without a project file
   - Using our own-created manifest during installation
- Tracking of dependencies
   - To prevent uninstalls with dependents
   - Or to also uninstall dependents

Out of scope:

- Installation for development (users can manually do this via alr exec -- gprinstall)

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.